We're running, talking to John Irving.
I'll just forget that it's there.
Well, thank you, Mr. Irving, for seeing me today.
I guess I'd like to say I enjoyed this book enormously.
Thank you.
And I like a John Irving novel, which is really expansive and really allows a lot of room to move at your pace.
Tell me how you view this book in the
I think it's a book that will please people who have liked my books before or who have found elements to like in my books before because I think it's a novel that
has more of those elements.
It's a bigger plot, a complicated plot.
I don't think someone who reads me with any pleasure can be a reader who doesn't like plot.
And the degree to which you can anticipate what happens in the story, but that there are also surprises,
I'm pleased with that, I guess what I call the seamlessness of the story.
I'm happy with the structure of it, and I think people who like me for any reason will like this book a lot.
On the other hand, I think those readers who are not John Irving readers, those readers who
whom I've irritated for one reason or another in the past, and who don't find the convolutions and labyrinths of my storytelling enjoyable, who find it tedious and manipulative and difficult.
I think that for people who have been put off by my books in the past, this one will be more off-putting than
or I should say maybe even more off-putting, because it's, as a manuscript, 200 pages longer than any other manuscript of mine.
You mentioned 1,000 plus pages.
It was 1,100 pages, and that's, you know, both a peripheral meaning and the cider house rules were
almost a thousand.
They were sort of 800, 900 page manuscripts.
This one is appreciably that much longer, but I feel though that the foreignness of the material, the Indian material in this novel, it's a little hard to judge that in relation to the other seven novels because it seems to me that
That might be something that my readers would enjoy because it's different, or different for me.
It's not the New England setting that they've been used to.
It's an Indian-born doctor living in Canada, and almost the entire novel is set in India.
And he speaks English.
It's like James Joyce writing, you know, an Irish rewriting Ulysses in English, publishing it in Paris.
It's all of these things.
Yes.
I think that that foreignness... I mean, there may simply be readers who find India and Dr. Darawalla and his concerns in general simply just too foreign for them.
I'm certainly prepared for that reaction as well.
Why is foreignness so important for you to stress in this book?
And you stress it a number of times.
Well, I think that was...
That was my entrance to the character.
In other words, I always begin a story, I begin thinking of a story at the ending, and I need to work my way back to where it begins.
In other words, if there is such a thing as a vision, and I must say I'm almost too practical to have visions.
I don't have visions, really.
But in this case,
Before Owen Meany was published, in fact, I think I was still proofreading the manuscript.
One winter night in Toronto, my wife and I were returning to our apartment after dinner, and it wasn't a street corner like Dr. Darawalla is standing on at the end of the novel.
It was more downtown than that, traffic lights, city lights.
But it was around Christmas time, snow falling.
And our cab was stopped at a traffic light.
And out the window I saw a man, a pedestrian, also waiting for the light to change.
And he looked a lot as I described Dr. Darawalla.
I mean, he may have been Indian, he may have been Middle Eastern.
In that light, I couldn't tell.
It was clear to me, though, that he was what newspapers call an immigrant of color, a visible minority.
He was no fifth-generation Canadian.
For sure.
And I noted how elegant he looked, how well-dressed, dignified, composed.
I would guess he was ten years older than me, early 60s.
And I was struck by how the life he came from, the past, wherever his birthplace was, it just struck me that that must strike him as a foreign country now.
And at the same time, it struck me that he could never feel entirely assimilated
where he was, and that the richness of where he came from was a very big part of his life, which probably had little means for expression in the country he lived.
I was just presuming these things.
You're a storyteller.
I was just ruminating or thinking about it, and he looked a little not sad, not lonely, just melancholic, which I would suppose would describe the tone of that ending.
Do you do this, by the way, do you create narratives when you see... I imagine how they got there.
I was looking at this man and I was thinking, I just took a look at this guy and I thought, I'll never know anything about him, but what an interesting life he's probably had that brought him here.
You know what I mean?
Absolutely, but certainly the title of the whole concept of the book does also become very clear in that concluding scene as well.
Did this come to you in a flash?
Yeah, it did, really.
I mean, I just thought... The circus came to you?
Not the circus.
That worked into my plans later.
That as well becomes very clear.
Yes.
I thought of this, though, that image of his foreignness and my presumption that he was or felt himself to be as much of a foreigner in his country of birth
as he must feel or often feel in his adopted country.
And I talked about this to some of my Indian friends in Toronto at first and then in London.
I talked about this guy and I said that's the end of a novel.
I don't know how to get to the beginning but the end of the novel is how we feel about this man when we see him by himself
in a foreign country.
Have you worked back?
And I worked sort of... Really?
Yeah, so I... In the structuring, yeah.
And then I go back.
I go back.
I've done this ever since The World According to Garp.
Every novel, Garp included, begins with a sense of an aftermath.
I've not called that by name an epilogue in every case.
This is the first time I've titled it epilogue since Garp.
Garp had an epilogue, too.
It really didn't be an epilogue, either.
I mean, it's... No.
It does bring the thing into focus.
It's true.
It's a kind of telescoping away.
You know, it's two or three years later.
It's that sense of moving away from the action and seeing where he stands.
So that, in a sense, you see, I began...
When I first started thinking about this book, I thought, I'm never going to go to India, and if I did go to India, what could I learn?
I could be there for three years, and I'd never know anything.
Had you not been to India when this thing happened?
So then the occasion came, the opportunity came.
The opportunity only came once I had sort of really made up the story.
In other words, I would not have gone until I had the story, because until I had the story, I didn't know what I needed to know.
Until I'd worked my way through, I'd looked at a lot of films,
Every other film in the Bombay cinema is about twins separated at birth.
And so I thought, well, that would be fun.
And how would the doctor know these twins?
And where would one of them, what would possibly bring the one who wasn't left in India, what could possibly bring him to India?
Who goes to India?
Well, the deserts go to India.
And what do they do?
Well, you see what I mean?
And I just sort of did that sort of thing.
The circus.
was almost the last piece of the puzzle because I had my doctor.
I knew his relationship to the twins.
I knew what the twins did.
I knew he wrote these terrible Hindi movies that he didn't even put his name to and had created this sort of monster character, a kind of Indian James Bond who just irritated the hell out of everyone.
And I saw how that related to the murders.
and that the murders he saw 20 years ago were unknown to him, the beginning of a series of serial slayings.
And the police inspector and Nancy, all these people kind of made a cast, and I... This moves from that, this all begins from that... Seeing the fellow on the corner, yeah.
And then... Then I began to hear, repeatedly, from my old friends, Mary Ellen Mark and Martin Bell, who I...
mentioned, of course, in the opening notes.
And they'd been spending years in India trying to get a documentary off the ground about the children in the circuses.
And I thought, well, what does this have to do with me or my story?
Because we'd never had a working relationship before.
I mean, Mary Ellen had taken a couple of hook jacket photographs from me, and I liked Martin's movies.
We were just friends.
And they had a totally different line of work.
I had my work, they had theirs.
But we got together when we could, just because we were friends.
And they knew I was thinking about this.
I kept calling it my immigrant novel.
And for the most part, I kept imagining it as a novel that would be, for the most part, set in North America, in Toronto.
And very little of it would take part in India, because it would be about this guy's life here.
That's why I didn't have enough of the connection or enough of the means or reason to sort of go to India.
And then Martin and Mary Ellen said to me, well, we keep hearing from the people that are trying to make this movie that there's no money to be had for documentaries, but if we were to make a feature, a fiction film, we could get the money to do it.
And, uh, what would you think about, um, they knew I'd just finished the screenplay for the Cider House Rules.
And so they knew I'd just finished the screenplay.
And I was complaining about the difficulty of writing a screenplay from a big novel and just shrinking it down.
And Martin said, sort of half-joking, really, um, well, why don't you write a screenplay first and then write the novel?
And, um,
And he said, in fact, why don't you write the screenplay for us?
Because we need to get some money to make this movie.
And I had seen Mary Ellen's photographs of children in these circuses for years.
The dwarfs.
All of them, yeah.
I'd seen those photographs for years.
And they were always very striking to me, as her photographs are.
And I've also seen her photographs of the prostitutes on Falkland Road in Bombay, a book that was published years ago.
The description of those eunuchs.
Oh, yeah.
How they become recognized.
They're real.
That's real.
And so I... And they're higher priced than the conventional ones.
Yes.
That's true.
Anyway... I'm sorry to interrupt.
One thing led to another, and they said,
well, why don't you come with us and we'll go around to these circuses and think us up a story about what can happen to the kids in the circus.
And then I thought Dr. Darawalla could be writing that story about what happens to children in the circus.
But the difference is that what he writes is what he wishes happened.
And what happens to them is what happens to them.
And the movie is what Dr. Darawalla wishes had happened.
And so then I began to see a connection to Martin and Mary Ellen's children in the circus and with my character, who is writing these Inspector Dara movies.
You see what I mean?
That was the connection.
The film is the same title, right?
It is the same title.
But it's not the same story.
No.
So those who see some of the circus movie should not expect to see a...
If there's a movie, it's way too soon to even know.
No one should hold their breath for the movie.
But if there is a movie, it will resemble Dr. Darawalla's screenplay.
It is very closely, it's very close to that, not to this story.
All right, so you explained how the circus element came in.
it transcends with you to metaphorical status.
Well, I think that came about in part because of how, although I was there in India for less than a month, for half of that time I was with the circus, traveling with the circus.
And, you know, a month isn't a very long period of time, but
Two weeks in an Indian circus is a long time.
There is an incredible completeness to their life.
The rigor of it, the discipline of it, the orderliness of it, three times a day, an act, every day, seven days a week, all year, is...
is just incredible.
The sense that, and also the sense that you have, which was a sense I wanted Dr. Darawalla to feel everywhere he goes in his country of birth, that the circus is an oasis.
It's a safe haven for the people who are fortunate enough to be sort of taken in by it.
It's better than the chaos and the danger out there, all around the surface.
And I felt very much taken in by them and adopted by them.
And people were, you know, it was a world unto itself.
And I felt strangely more comfortable in it
Because it was a world with rules and order, and it had a daily enterprise about it.
You got up at the same time, there were exercises to do, there were chores to do, there was cooking to be done, there was sewing to be done, there was practicing new acts.
and then all of that had to be put aside and there was a big meal to eat and a long nap to have and then starts the cycle of one performance after another and another big meal at about midnight after the last performance is over and then to bed and it's just it's a remarkable world it's sort of a world of its own and and it contrasts greatly to
the life in the streets of Bombay, the life in the Red Light District, the comings and goings at a club like the Duckworth Club, at a private club.
Anyone who knows Bombay will recognize the Duckworth Club as a place called the Willingdon Club.
I would have called it the Willingdon Club and kept it the real club, except that
the real Lady Willingdon... Did she expose her to crisis?
No.
The real Lady Willingdon was a kleptomania.
And I didn't like that as well.
I thought that that was kind of a pathetic vice, whereas exhibitionism is an interesting vice.
And I wanted the lady of the founders
wife to be more interesting than a kleptomaniac and so I couldn't very well make Lady Willingdon into an exhibitionist because she was a kleptomaniac and the Willingdon family would have sued me or something and so I thought so I thought call her Duckworth and let her expose herself and there are a few other
St.
Ignatius is in real life in Bombay.
It's in exactly the part of town where I say it is, but in real life it's St.
Mary's, and I wanted the Ignatius because of the Jesuitical connection.
I think, having never been to India, and I've been to Thailand, but there was a certain, you described the smell of these cities.
Having never been there, I really feel that you've given me a sense of what this city is.
It uses open service and all these things.
Absolutely.
Every city I've ever come from has a small one.
I haven't been there in 25 years.
Yes.
I'd go back and I'd have to flash back, I'm sure.
Absolutely.
No, it's indelible.
These are the kinds of things that you have to go and spend time there to get this kind of ambiance.
Yeah, you do.
You do.
You could have probably written a novel without having spent this time in India, but I don't think you would have the richness.
I don't think you can't get the atmosphere of the detail.
But almost more important than being there, or more important than how long I was there or how little I was there, was also having these expert readers having
not just Indian friends read the book, but they weren't just friends, they were also experts in certain areas.
Three doctors read the book, one of them Indian, particularly a doctor of infectious medicine, an AIDS doctor.
In fact, one of my readers for this book is the man who's
whose own book was on the front page of the Times Book Review, or is on the front page of the Times Book Review this coming Sunday, Abraham Verghese.
Let's just see.
Let me just grab that.
I just want to check the tape.
That's Dr. Verghese there.
It's a coincidence that we have our books coming out at sort of the same time.
But what I mean is that in the case of all of my friends,
and readers, they knew an area of this book.
It wasn't just that they were friends of mine, it's that they were experts in certain areas.
Abraham, in all the medical detail, Dianita Singh, who's mentioned in those authors' notes, knows more about the prostitute community, the transsexual community, the Hedra community, than probably any other journalist.
in India.
She's a journalist who's based in New Delhi, but she's done a lot of work with the prostitute community in Bombay.
Farooq Chothia, who lives in Bombay and who was so important because of what he knows about Bombay and about the circuses, that I named Dr. Dharawala after him and gave Dr. Dharawala his first name.
So that as important as my being in India,
more important is two three years down the road when when there's a 1200 page first draft and then six months later when there's an 1100 page second draft these people had to read it and and they had to say no no no you've got this wrong it's not there it's here and and and they were very important to this and i i think i felt
I would have felt intimidated to be that dependent on so many expert readers if I had not already had that experience.
And I had it with the Cider House Rules because I'm not an obstetrician or a gynecologist and what could I know about an orphanage and an orphanage hospital 10 years or 12 years before I was born?
And the answer was I had a lot of people at
Yale Medical School and at the Yale Medical Historical Library, who were checking up on me, who were reading over my shoulder.
And that experience was so positive, and I felt that it worked so well that I wasn't more than moderately intimidated by the prospect of this.
Now, Garth was published in 78.
I guess, 16 years, who, I mean, AIDS was a totally unknowable thought that it would become such a, I mean, it's a metaphor for you.
Yeah, yeah.
And again, going back to the streetcar in Toronto, I mean, at what point does this enter the, into this complex situation?
Well, it seems to me that you can't even superficially touch upon the prostitute community today without bringing that picture into question.
and the principal question today if you're in the business as Vinod is in the business of rescuing child prostitutes or would be child prostitutes is are they HIV positive and in India that is going to become I think a more terrifying episode than what we've seen heretofore in Africa the profile of
the way AIDS is communicated in India is a heterosexual profile.
There are parts of Asia and Africa where the contact is strictly heterosexual and is spreading like gonorrhea.
And it's a different profile in North America.
where it is very much not limited to, but in the main, to be found in the homosexual community and the drug user community.
That's not the profile of the world, though.
So you have to... You know, there were a number of areas that led me to that, as surely as...
When I was thinking about my orphanage physician and the orphans in the cider house rules, I was inevitably led to abortion because you can't consider a hospital at an orphanage without considering what do you do about that.
That's just historically true.
That was a factor.
There are no orphanages as there were of the kind I was writing about in the Cider House Rules after abortion becomes a legal operation.
After 1973, they're gone.
And so that novel had to be historical.
And in the case of this, I mean, how can you... I couldn't raise the issue of the biology of homosexuality
the relation, the probable relationship between one male homosexual twin, the likelihood of his twin also being a homosexual, is pretty good, genetically.
It's pretty big.
And I couldn't raise that issue, it seems to me, or the issue of prostitutes in India, without giving Dr. Dharawalla
some contact with HIV, he just has to have it.
It seemed to me it had to be something that would touch his life.
into the story much more than just merely a device in the novel.
Oh, sure.
Oh, no, it does.
It does.
And it really, to me, its presence in the novel, although it's a small presence, is an indication of... It's ominous, certainly.
Yes, it's ominous, and it's an indication of things to come.
It must be... It is a subject on the mind of anyone who has a...
a friend, a family member, a loved one who is homosexual or who is otherwise at risk.
It's just something you... This isn't a national statistic.
I don't offer this one.
But the friends...
I've had who have died of AIDS have all been carried.
I'm not offering that as evidence or proof, but that's just a fact.
Right?
It's a fact.
It's probably the case of most people.
Everyone I know who has died of AIDS is the same.
Yeah.
That's the way it's been.
I noticed here when I was briefly
There's a conversation with Joseph Heller.
I'm interviewing him in New York next month.
Well, give him my best.
I like him very much.
Tim O'Brien sends his best, by the way.
I did an interview with him.
He's my first piece from Minneapolis.
Of course, he's in Minneapolis.
He's a Minneapolis boy, right.
And he had some interest.
I hope we have a chance to get to a few other things.
But the reason I mention Heller, for better or for worse,
Joseph Ellis' first book was Catch-22, and his career is defined by that book.
To the point, of course, Yazarian lives at the end, and he has got his deceased, and I don't think you'd probably consider ever doing a sequel in any case to that book, but his career has been defined by that novel.
Do you feel that your career has been defined by, for better or for